Chapter III
Exercise 00: BraiiiiiiinnnzzzZ
Exercise : 00
BraiiiiiiinnnzzzZ
Turn-in directory : ex00/
Files to turn in : Makefile, main.cpp, Zombie.{h, hpp}, Zombie.cpp,
newZombie.cpp, randomChump.cpp
Forbidden functions : None
First, implement a Zombie class. It has a string private attribute name.
Add a member function void announce( void ); to the Zombie class. 


Zombies announce themselves as follows:
<name>: BraiiiiiiinnnzzzZ...
Don’t print the angle brackets (< and >). For a zombie named Foo, the message
would be:
Foo: BraiiiiiiinnnzzzZ...
Then, implement the two following functions:
• Zombie* newZombie( std::string name );
It creates a zombie, name it, and return it so you can use it outside of the function
scope.
• void randomChump( std::string name );
It creates a zombie, name it, and the zombie announces itself.
Now, what is the actual point of the exercise? You have to determine in what case
it’s better to allocate the zombies on the stack or heap.
Zombies must be destroyed when you don’t need them anymore. The destructor must
print a message with the name of the zombie for debugging purposes.
5





Chapter IV
Exercise 01: Moar brainz!
Exercise : 01
Moar brainz!
Turn-in directory : ex01/
Files to turn in : Makefile, main.cpp, Zombie.{h, hpp}, Zombie.cpp,
zombieHorde.cpp
Forbidden functions : None
Time to create a horde of Zombies!
Implement the following function in the appropriate file:
Zombie* zombieHorde( int N, std::string name );
It must allocate N Zombie objects in a single allocation. Then, it has to initialize the
zombies, giving each one of them the name passed as parameter. The function returns a
pointer to the first zombie.
Implement your own tests to ensure your zombieHorde() function works as expected.
Try to call announce() for each one of the zombies.
Don’t forget to delete all the zombies and check for memory leaks.
6













Chapter V
Exercise 02: HI THIS IS BRAIN
Exercise : 02
HI THIS IS BRAIN
Turn-in directory : ex02/
Files to turn in : Makefile, main.cpp
Forbidden functions : None
Write a program that contains:
• A string variable initialized to "HI THIS IS BRAIN".
• stringPTR: A pointer to the string.
• stringREF: A reference to the string.
Your program has to print:
• The memory address of the string variable.
• The memory address held by stringPTR.
• The memory address held by stringREF.
And then:
• The value of the string variable.
• The value pointed to by stringPTR.
• The value pointed to by stringREF.
That’s all, no tricks. The goal of this exercise is to demystify references which can
seem completely new. Although there are some little differences, this is another syntax
for something you already do: address manipulation.
7
















Chapter VI
Exercise 03: Unnecessary violence
Exercise : 03
Unnecessary violence
Turn-in directory : ex03/
Files to turn in : Makefile, main.cpp, Weapon.{h, hpp}, Weapon.cpp, HumanA.{h,
hpp}, HumanA.cpp, HumanB.{h, hpp}, HumanB.cpp
Forbidden functions : None

Implement a Weapon class that has:
• A private attribute type, which is a string.
• A getType() member function that returns a const reference to type.
• A setType() member function that sets type using the new one passed as parameter.

Now, create two classes: HumanA and HumanB. They both have a Weapon and a
name. They also have a member function attack() that displays (of course, without the
angle brackets):
<name> attacks with their <weapon type>
HumanA and HumanB are almost the same except for these two tiny details:
• While HumanA takes the Weapon in its constructor, HumanB doesn’t.
• HumanB may not always have a Weapon, whereas HumanA will always be armed.

If your implementation is correct, executing the following code will print an attack
with "crude spiked club" then a second attack with "some other type of club" for both
test cases:
int main()
{
{
Weapon club = Weapon("crude spiked club");
HumanA bob("Bob", club);
bob.attack();
club.setType("some other type of club");
bob.attack();
}
{
Weapon club = Weapon("crude spiked club");
HumanB jim("Jim");
jim.setWeapon(club);
jim.attack();
club.setType("some other type of club");
jim.attack();
}
return 0;
}
Don’t forget to check for memory leaks.
In which case do you think it would be best to use a pointer to
Weapon? And a reference to Weapon? Why? Think about it before
starting this exercise.
9











Chapter VII
Exercise 04: Sed is for losers
Exercise : 04
Sed is for losers
Turn-in directory : ex04/
Files to turn in : Makefile, main.cpp, *.cpp, *.{h, hpp}
Forbidden functions : std::string::replace
Create a program that takes three parameters in the following order: a filename and
two strings, s1 and s2.
It will open the file <filename> and copies its content into a new file
<filename>.replace, replacing every occurrence of s1 with s2.
Using C file manipulation functions is forbidden and will be considered cheating. All
the member functions of the class std::string are allowed, except replace. Use them
wisely!
Of course, handle unexpected inputs and errors. You have to create and turn in your
own tests to ensure your program works as expected.
10









Chapter VIII
Exercise 05: Harl 2.0
Exercise : 05
Harl 2.0
Turn-in directory : ex05/
Files to turn in : Makefile, main.cpp, Harl.{h, hpp}, Harl.cpp
Forbidden functions : None
Do you know Harl? We all do, do we? In case you don’t, find below the kind of
comments Harl makes. They are classified by levels:
• "DEBUG" level: Debug messages contain contextual information. They are mostly
used for problem diagnosis.
Example: "I love having extra bacon for my 7XL-double-cheese-triple-pickle-specialketchup burger. I really do!"
• "INFO" level: These messages contain extensive information. They are helpful for
tracing program execution in a production environment.
Example: "I cannot believe adding extra bacon costs more money. You didn’t put
enough bacon in my burger! If you did, I wouldn’t be asking for more!"
• "WARNING" level: Warning messages indicate a potential issue in the system.
However, it can be handled or ignored.
Example: "I think I deserve to have some extra bacon for free. I’ve been coming for
years whereas you started working here since last month."
• "ERROR" level: These messages indicate an unrecoverable error has occurred.
This is usually a critical issue that requires manual intervention.
Example: "This is unacceptable! I want to speak to the manager now."

You are going to automate Harl. It won’t be difficult since it always says the same
things. You have to create a Harl class with the following private member functions:
• void debug( void );
• void info( void );
• void warning( void );
• void error( void );
Harl also has a public member function that calls the four member functions above
depending on the level passed as parameter:
void complain( std::string level );
The goal of this exercise is to use pointers to member functions. This is not a
suggestion. Harl has to complain without using a forest of if/else if/else. It doesn’t think
twice!
Create and turn in tests to show that Harl complains a lot. You can use the examples
of comments listed above in the subject or choose to use comments of your own.
12




Chapter IX
Exercise 06: Harl filter
Exercise : 06
Harl filter
Turn-in directory : ex06/
Files to turn in : Makefile, main.cpp, Harl.{h, hpp}, Harl.cpp
Forbidden functions : None
Sometimes you don’t want to pay attention to everything Harl says. Implement a
system to filter what Harl says depending on the log levels you want to listen to.
Create a program that takes as parameter one of the four levels. It will display all
messages from this level and above. For example:
$> ./harlFilter "WARNING"
[ WARNING ]
I think I deserve to have some extra bacon for free.
I've been coming for years whereas you started working here since last month.
[ ERROR ]
This is unacceptable, I want to speak to the manager now.
$> ./harlFilter "I am not sure how tired I am today..."
[ Probably complaining about insignificant problems ]
Although there are several ways to deal with Harl, one of the most effective is to
SWITCH it off.
Give the name harlFilter to your executable.
You must use, and maybe discover, the switch statement in this exercise.
You can pass this module without doing exercise 06.